---
layout: post
title:  "Hamlet Essay"
date:   2018-09-24
excerpt: "Essay on 'Hamlet' by Shakespeare."
project: true
tag:
- English
- Essay
- Hamlet
- Shakespeare
comments: false
---

<center><h1>Rational Hamlet</h1></center>

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hamlet is a rational human being. He’s just expressing his grief in a way that people nowadays frown upon. Hamlet just had to progress through the five stages of grief like any normal person.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The first stage that Hamlet passes through is denial or isolation; he produces this facade of being insane to ward himself from others. Take for example this quote where he actually says that he is insane; "I am but mad north-north-west: when the wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw. " (2.2.402-403) Hamlet's father dies and soon after his mother remarries to his uncle. This denies him his period for grieving; while thrusting Hamlet forward into "madness." So when he started to feign being mad he dipped farther into the pool of insanity. Hamlet then progresses into anger. Hamlet's denial rears it's head in the form of madness.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The next stage Hamlet goes through is anger. The anger ignites like a small flame that will grow into a bonfire and consume him before dying out. When the Ghost tells Hamlet that Claudius killed his father, a spark ignites inside of Hamlet. "How strange or odd some'er I bear myself / (As I perchance hereafter shall think meet To put an antic disposition on)" (1.5.190-192) Hamlet's anger from that point, grows up to be a big and strong, angry fire baby. He plans and plots which nurtures his anger more than stewing on it until the day he dies. If the Ghost didn't tell Hamlet that his father was MURDERED by his Uncle, Hamlet wouldn't be so angry. He then falls through depression.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hamlet falls into depression next. His mind is already deteriorated at this point. His madness grows like a bout of Virginia Creeper strangling the host tree.

> *To be, or not to be--that is the question:  
> Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer  
> The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune  
> Or to take arms against a sea of troubles  
> And by opposing end them. To die, to sleep--  
> No more--and by a sleep to say we end  
> The heartache, and the thousand natural shocks  
> That flesh is heir to.  
> (3.1.56-63)*

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;His depression is evidently evident in the excerpt from his speech about if he should be alive or dead. Hamlet shows that he thinks he shouldn't be alive many different times throughout almost the entire play. This quote is only one of the bigger examples of his depression. Hamlet then moves into his bargaining stage; a natural progression from depression. Hamlet is now in the bargaining stage. His bargaining, seen within him, is able to be seen in some passages.

> *Now might I do it pat, now he is praying,  
> And now I'll do 't. \[He draws his sword.\]  
> And so he goes to heaven,  
> And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:  
> A villain kills my father, and for that,  
> I, his sole son, do this same villain send  
> To heaven.  
> (3.3.77-83)*

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This excerpt is most definitely a way of bargaining with himself about if he should take the chance. Kill his step-father while he's praying. Hamlet rationalizes not killing Claudius by saying that if Claudius is killed while praying. It would send him to heaven instead of hell. Which is not what Hamlet wants for the man who MURDERED his father and the soon after married his mother. So he stops himself from killing him right then and there. Hamlet is now close to accepting his father's death.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hamlet is now moving into acceptance. This is good; this is very good. It means that Hamlet is close to finally accepting his father's death and moving on. Hamlet gets closure when he is able to kill Claudius seconds before he dies. (Or was it minutes?) Many people died before Hamlet was able to get his revenge on Claudius for killing his father, the king. Which is all and good in of itself.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hamlet, like any normal human being when someone close to him dies, grieves. He does not fall into deep state of depression for more than a few months. He only does because it's part of the stages of grief. Hamlet is a rational human who is just distraught with grief. If your father was MURDERED by your uncle and then your uncle married your mother, wouldn't you be planning the uncle's MURDER?

<center>
Works Cited
</center>

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Library, Folger Shakespeare. "Hamlet." *Hamlet*. Folger Shakespeare Library, n.d. Web. 08 May 2017.
