## Historical


**<span class="underline">Duncan I</span>** of Scotland (b. 1001) ascended the throne at age 33
killed his grandfather, **<span class="underline">Malcolm II</span>**
Duncan’s reign was not stellar – he was spoiled, overzealous, and his time on
the throne was wrought with failed campaigns and the deaths of many Scots.
In an attempt to gain his people’s respect, Duncan attempted to invade Northumbria
He failed miserably – on his return to Scotland, many of his unhappy lords
revolted – one of these lords was his cousin, **<span class="underline">Macbeth</span>**, Lord of Moray.
Macbeth eventually killed Duncan I in 1040 and ascended the throne with his wife,
his cousin, **<span class="underline">Grauch</span>** – Duncan’s sons fled the country – **<span class="underline">Malcolm III</span>** went to England
and **<span class="underline">Donald Ban</span>** went to Ireland – they would eventually return to reign as kings.
Prior to her marriage to Macbeth, Grauch had been the wife of **<span class="underline">Gillecomgain</span>**, son
of Maelbrigte – Gillecomgain and Malcolm II had murdered Macbeth’s father in 1020
Gillecomgain and Grauch, granddaughter of **<span class="underline">Kenneth III</span>**, had a son – **<span class="underline">Lulach</span>**
In 1032, Grauch’s husband Gillecomgain was burned alive in his fortress – Macbeth
took over his title, Lord of Moray, and married his wife in 1033 when MacBeth was 28
During his 17 year reign, Macbeth did much for Scotland – under his leadership,
North and South Scotland (the North was controlled by Norway) were reunited – he organized a military patrol that canvassed the entire country, enforcing law and order. In **<span class="underline">1057</span>**, MacBeth’s reign came to an end – **<span class="underline">Malcolm III</span>**, Duncan’s son, raised up an army with English assistance and invaded Scotland – he defeated Macbeth and became King of Scotland, but not until after his stepson, Lulach, attempted to reign – he was assassinated in 1058 after only 7 months on the throne (Malcolm most likely had something to do with the assassination) – at the age of 27, Malcolm was crowned King Malcolm III of Scotland.





## Act 1

### Scene 1
**Setting** - This is a very dark tragedy - most of the play takes plce in a darkened world - we will see that this represents the evil that is come upon the Earth.

II. 10-11 - ```"Fair is foul and foul is fair..." ``` **paradox** - the play has numerous paradoxes which are significant in terms of the plot - this one, while not immediately understood by the audience, will be proven accurate as the play progresses.

### Scene 3 
II 19-20 - **motif** - sleeplessness is a reoccuring theme throughout the play.

II 65-68 - ```"Lesser than Macbeth and greater..."``` **paradox** - the witches' prophecies are a major ***theme*** that drives the play - this one, directed to Banquo, will affect Macbeth's actions significantly.

II 108-109 - **motif** - the idea of "borrowed robes" will be a motif that goes throughout the play's action - borrowed robes, as robes not meant for one, is a metaphor for that which is not rightly yours.


Banquo is presented as the ***foil*** - the opposite or contrast in character and personally to what may be the story's protagonist - through him, we see more negative qualities of Macbeth.

### Scene 4

II 12-15 - **irony** - a great example of irony here - Duncan laments that, with regard to the former Thane of Cawdor, one cannot "judge a book by its cover" - the irony is that he is about to make the exact same error in judgement with Macbeth!

### Scene 5

II 34-49 - **soliloquy** - Lady Macbeth's desire for the crown exceeds even Macbeth's! She is willing to suppress the voice of conscience, participate in any crime needed to achieve this goal.

### Scene 7

II. 1-28 - **soliloquy** the first of several soliloquies in the play that reveal much about Macbeth's character - here his ***internal conflict*** over the actions he is considering.

**Theme** "vaulting ambition" (I.27) - the character flaw that will ultimately be Macbeth's undoing - to "vault" or leap over what stands in your path - this ideda was also suggested by II. 48-50 of Scene iv

## Act 2

### Scene 1

II 19-24 - Once again, we see Banquo as the ***foil*** to Macbeth - the prophecies have not had near the same affect on him as they have had on Macbeth.

II 49-50 - **motif** - once again there is the continuous theme of sleeplessness, here with the idea of “unnatural occurrences” - evil will cause great disturbances in the universe (the Great Chain of Being). 

### Scene 2

II 33-41 - **motif** - Macbeth hears a voice saying, "Sleep no more" - sleep, which usually brings peace, now will no longer do so for MAcbeth.

II 60-63 - **symbol** - blood here has become a symbol of guilt

### Scene 3

Here, one of the most well known examples of ***comic relief*** - a humorous scene follwing on the heels of a very tense monment, designed to give the audience a moment of relief - the drunken porter is the most famous example.

I 35 - `"I know this is a joyful trouble to you"` is an excellent example of an ***oxymoron***.

### Scene 4

II 5-10 - **Symbol** again, we see the theme of evil and darkness combined here as the land is darkened, although it is daylight hours, symbolising evil loosed upon the world - with more to follow.

I 38 - `"Lest our old robes sit easier than our new!"` - "the borrowed robes" **motif**

## Act 3

### Scene 1

II 48-72 - **soliloquy** - the second major solilquy by Macbeth - revealing how little pleausre he is enjoying now that he has achieved what he so despreately wanted - he feels that he has sacrififced his soul for the benifit of _Banquo's_ children, as Macbeth will have no heirs!

I 57 - __allusion__ - Macbeth feels himself to be inferior to Banquo, likening their relationship to that of Mark Antony and Octavius, Ceasar's heir.

### Scene 2

II 4-7 - note Lady Macbeth's words here - almost the exact sentiment as was expressed by Macbeth in the previous scene.

### Scene 4

I 122 - the **imagery** of blood is one of the play's most pervasive images.

II 45-47 - **symbolism** - up to this point, the play has contained many references to the dark forces of evil - from this point on, forces of ***good***, both earthly and supernatural, will become increasingly strong.

## Act 4

### Scene 1 

52-61 - **imagery** - the images described by Macbeth in these lines are of nature in revolt are a reference to Macbeth's evil actions, which have subverted the natural order of the universe - he is projecting onto nature his own inner deterioration.

II 148-154 - **characterisation** - it is obvious from these lines how far Macbeth has deteriorated - the killing of Macduff's famuly is a totally senseless, brutal crime built on revenge - nothing more

### Scene 3

the conversation between Maclom and Macduff is a little confusing, but significant - Malcom is testing Macduff's honesty and legitimacy here by falsely portraying himself as a monster worse than Macbeth in order to see Macduff's response - to know whether or not he [Macduff] can be trusted.

## Act 5

### Scene 1 

I 18-19 - **symbolism** - Lady Macbeth's dear of the dark is linked to her guilt and fear of "dark" (evil) forces that her deeds have served.

II 28-32 - **characterisation** Lady Macbeth has completely degenerated from the courageous, strong-willed woman of Act I to this hollow-eyed, sleep-walking, shell of her former self, trying to wash Duncan's imaginary blood from her hands.

II 58-59 - **motif** "unnatural" is again used to indicate disorder as a result of evil.

### Scene 2

II 20-22 - again we have the whole __motif__ of "borrowed robes" here, as Angus remarks that Macbeth's title "hangs loose about him like a giant's robe/Upon a dwarfish theif."

### Scene 3

II 22-28 - **characterisation** - Macbeth is weary of life; cut off from human companionship, reviled by men, he has nothing left to live for - even if here were able to live, he cannot look forward to honour, love, and respect that old people may enjoy.

### Scene 5

II 17-28 - **soliloquy** - Macbeth's most famous soliloquy - contains numerous very famous lines, often refrenced throughout literary history - best known is the ***metaphor*** in II. 23-28, which characterises life as a burning candle and a stage actor - both transient. This speech is admired as one of Shakespeare's greatest.
