Spenser was the first greatest sonnet writer in England. His poems are a fine reflection of basic Elizabethan themes of amorous pursuit, poetic immortalization of material qualities, and the endurance of intellectual beauty.

I. 1 - “Like as a huntsman…” suggests that the poet is making a comparison

II. 1-4 - **IMAGERY** - Spenser gives a lesson in the gentle art of seduction - for the relationship between man and woman to prosper and be “firmly tied” (suggests the bonds of matrimony), mutual affection rather than aggressive pursuit is a better strategy - the implication is that woman (deer) wants to be captured - this is really the “game” of hunt and capture played by men and women.

II. 13-14 - **tone** - the sonnet ends with the speaker a little puzzled and a little surprised at his good fortune.

**Sonnet 30**

I. 1 - the poem begins with a comparison in contrasts - the poet’s lover is compared to ice and he compares himself to fire.

II. 2-4 - **paradox** - the poet presents a contradictory image here - his hot desire ought to melt her “cold” response, but, in reality, only strengthens it and makes her more obstinate\!

II. 5-8 here, the opposite question is voiced - rather than cooling his “exceeding heat,” her “heart-frozen cold” only increases it.

II. 9-12 - the first four lines of the sestet simply restate the idea presented in the octave.

II. 13-14 - **couplet** - the closing statement that love is a strange and curious thing - the normal, natural laws do not apply\!

**Sonnet 75**

II. 1-2 - **symbolism** - the waves obliterating the name in the sand symbolises the fleeting and puny nature of humans and human works as compared to the forces of nature and the pressures of time.

II. 5-6 - lines here suggest that humanity, in its arrogance, aspires, vainly to resist the force of decay.
