---
layout: post
title:  "The Victorian Age"
date:   2019-04-16
excerpt: "Victorian age is named after Victoria, who became a queen in 1837 at age of 18 and ruled for 68 years until her death in 1901. So, the period from 1837 to 1901 is called Victorian era."
feature: https://hips.hearstapps.com/hmg-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/images/queen-victoria-2-1514478998.jpg?crop=1.00xw:0.333xh;0,0.173xh&resize=1200:*
tag:
- English
- Notes
- Romantic Age 
- Historical
comments: true
---


## Background 
The Victorian age began with the ascension to the British throne of 18 year old Queen Victoria in 1837, succeeding her uncle, William IV - the last of the Hanoverian monarchs, Victoria reigned for 68 years until her death in 1901.

The word "Victorian" is, in our contemporary society, often commonly associated with prudishness and sexual repression, but this is something of an over simplification. Although extremely conservative, the Victorians had a very progressive attitude with regard to social reform - the Victorians were forced to deal with both the positive and the negative aspects of the industrial revolution, particularly its effects on religious faith. 

The Victorian Age is usually discussed in terms of three basic periods - **The Early**, **The Middle**, and **The Late Periods**. 

## The Early Period (1832 - 1848)  

Passage of the **First Reform Bill** (1832) extended the vote to the middle class. (specifically, property owners paying at least 10 pounds of rent annually) - also, there occurred the redistribution of parlamentary representaion.  

Mass poverty still remained, despite these changes - the working classes and the lower middle classes still have no voting rights - also the "**Corn Laws**" kept the price of things and other related foods ridiculously high - the repeal of this and other similar laws helped to increase prosperity and improved living conditions for the poor - it also ushered in **free trade**.  

## The Middle Period (1848 - 1870)

England achieved its greatest world and economic power during this time period - London became a world center for banking and shipping - English towns like Sheffield and Birmingham became the centers for the wool and metal industries.  

There were also great scientific developments as well - the first Worlds Fair (the "Great Exhibition of 1851") demonstrated to the world the wonders of modern science.  

In government, conflicts arose between the Whigs (Liberals), representing the newly wealthy middle classes, and the Tories (Conservatives), who still represented the "old order" ie. the Monarchy, the Church of England, and the class system - led by Benjamin Disraeli, the Conservatives passed **The Second Reform Bill** in 1867, extending the vote to all members of the working class (the exception being agricultural labourers).


## The Late Period (1870 - 1901)

During this period, Britain extended its empire to points throughout the world - Benjamin Disraeli was the foremost advocate for British imperialism, in actuality, for the purpose of spreading the Anglo-Saxon race's "superior civilization" throughout the world! England's rule extended to places like **Canada**, **Australia**, **New Zealand**, **India**, **South Africa**, and **Asia**. 

Writers like **Rudyard Kipling (1865 - 1936)** helped to introduce readers to the larger world through his tales and ballads of British India, becoming, in effect, a spokesman for this imperialism of which England was so proud.   
At home, middle class prosperity flourished, but tension was building in the form of a rapidly imposing Germany, the development of labour unions, and the rise of ***Socialism***. 

In terms of the social make-up of Victorian society, make note of the influence of the new **Evangelicalism** - a religious movement begun by the followers of **John Wesley (1703 - 1791)** - the founder of Methodism - Evangelicals were dedicated to humane causes and social reform - there were responsible for the emancipation of all slaves in the British Empire in 1833 - the Evangelicals also believed in a very strict, puritanical code of morality - their influence was eventually felt, to the greatest degree, in the middle classes.  
Both Evangelicalism and *Utilitarianism* (which sought to subject all human practices and intuitions to the scrutiny of scientific reasoning to determine their usefulness, or utility) influenced a concern among the Victorian middle classes for the working-class poor - at least to some degree. 