---
layout: post
title:  "To a Mouse"
date:   2019-03-06
excerpt: "'To a Mouse, on Turning Her Up in Her Nest With the Plough, November, 1785' is a Scots-language poem written by Robert Burns in 1785, and was included in the Kilmarnock volume. According to legend, Burns was ploughing in the fields and accidentally destroyed a mouse's nest, which it needed to survive the winter."
feature: https://i.pinimg.com/originals/3e/dc/7c/3edc7caa6ac7b14cee0c99def2ecc747.jpg
tag:
- English
- Notes
- Burns
- Mouse
- Historical
comments: true
---
<center><pre>
WEE, sleekit, cow’rin, tim’rous beastie,	
O, what a panic’s in thy breastie!	
Thou need na start awa sae hasty,	
                    Wi’ bickering brattle!	
I wad be laith to rin an’ chase thee,	        5
                    Wi’ murd’ring pattle!	
 
I’m truly sorry man’s dominion,	
Has broken nature’s social union,	
An’ justifies that ill opinion,	
                    Which makes thee startle	        10
At me, thy poor, earth-born companion,	
                    An’ fellow-mortal!	
 
I doubt na, whiles, but thou may thieve;	
What then? poor beastie, thou maun live!	
A daimen icker in a thrave	        15
                    ’S a sma’ request;	
I’ll get a blessin wi’ the lave,	
                    An’ never miss’t!	
 
Thy wee bit housie, too, in ruin!	
It’s silly wa’s the win’s are strewin!	        20
An’ naething, now, to big a new ane,	
                    O’ foggage green!	
An’ bleak December’s winds ensuin,	
                    Baith snell an’ keen!	
 
Thou saw the fields laid bare an’ waste,	        25
An’ weary winter comin fast,	
An’ cozie here, beneath the blast,	
                    Thou thought to dwell—	
Till crash! the cruel coulter past	
                    Out thro’ thy cell.	        30
 
That wee bit heap o’ leaves an’ stibble,	
Has cost thee mony a weary nibble!	
Now thou’s turn’d out, for a’ thy trouble,	
                    But house or hald,	
To thole the winter’s sleety dribble,	        35
                    An’ cranreuch cauld!	
 
But, Mousie, thou art no thy lane,	
In proving foresight may be vain;	
The best-laid schemes o’ mice an’ men	
                    Gang aft agley,	        40
An’lea’e us nought but grief an’ pain,	
                    For promis’d joy!	
 
Still thou art blest, compar’d wi’ me	
The present only toucheth thee:	
But, Och! I backward cast my e’e.	        45
                    On prospects drear!	
An’ forward, tho’ I canna see,	
                    I guess an’ fear!
</pre></center>


Burns shares with the famous 20<sup>th</sup> century poet Robert Frost a close relationship to the *pastoral world* - a simple, everyday occurrence can take on significance and become a broad commentary on the human condition. Thus is the case with "To A Mouse."

Subtitle - "ON TURNING HER UP ...NOVEMBER 1785" - according to Burn's brother, the poem was written just as the subtitle says.

I 1 - "Wee, sleekit, cow'rin'..." - this dialect form is standard "Habbie," traditional in Scots dialect poetry (after a form of folk elegy by Robert Sempill for Habbie Simson, a famous bagpiper).  
I 2 - "breastie!" - the diminutive ***ie*** endings emphasize the smallness of the mouse and imply the speaker's affection for it.  
II 7-12 **diction** - the apology is the only stanza phrased almost entirely in standard English, emphasizing the formality of the comment.   
II 31-36 - **symbol** - this stanza may actually refer to the exploitation of the tenant farmer by a wealthy landowner - Burn's family had lost more than one farm!  
II 37-42 - a very famous stanza - probably because it expresses a common experience - line 39 is the source of the title of John Steinbeck's novel, *Of Mice and Men*.  
II 43-end - **theme** - the most important stanza of the poem - here, Burns indicates that despite their shared hardship, the mouse's life is still enviable - his life revolves only around the *present* - humans regret the past and fear the future. It is a classic theme in Romantic philosophy that humans' chief obstacle to true happiness is the ***knowledge of their own mortality*** nature does not share this burden!