---
layout: post
title:  "Songs of Innocence & Experience"
date:   2019-03-07
excerpt: "William Blake’s work heralds the end of the 18th century Neoclassical Period - for Blake, the essential universe is not physical and rational, but spiritual and irrational - it must be unuderstood through imagination and through intuition."
feature: https://dwarf.pro/site/assets/img/flowers.png
tag:
- English
- Notes
- Blake
- Songs of Innocence
- Songs of Experience
- Historical
comments: true
---
## Songs of Experience
William Blake's work heralds the end of the 18<sup>th</sup> century Neoclassical Period - for Blake, the essential universe is not physical and rational, but spiritual and irrational - it must be unuderstood through *imagination* and through *intuition*.

### "Introduction"

*Symbolically*, the child on the cloud probably represents **both** the infant Jesus and "every child."

II 3-4 - **persona** - the speaker is the poet  
I 9 - the child weeps out of joy for the devine elegance of the song.  
I 13 - various prophets and writers have claimed to have recieved a simliar command  
II 16-19 - **parralelism** - these lines convey Blake's deliberate execution of the angel's command (the child is an angel!)  


### "The Lamb"

*Symbolically* - the lamb is both an image of Christ and a traditional figure in the pastoral world  
I 3 - the lamb has a purpose in the world  
I 5 - this image of the lamb is idealised to suggest by **metaphor** the qualities of the lamb in stanza 2.  
I 8 - **personification** - the valley's "rejoice" - the vales are given human emotion, thereby indicating God's universal presence.  

### "The Chimney Sweeper"

I 2 - the father's act tells the reader that this poem is about innocence in spite of everything in the world; it is not about a world ruled by innocence.  
II 5-8 - **symbol** - the pastoral "lamb's back" and "white hair" represent the innocence of childhood; "soot" represents expererience and reality.  
I 12 - black coffins represent the experiences of these boys.  
II 23-24 - **irony** the heavenly dream liberates their minds, but the boys are still enslaved on Earth, where harm can be done to them.


### “The Little Boy Lost”

I 1-4 – A boy lost in the woods is calling to his absent father. In Blake, the adult world is frequently represented by a parental figure.  
I 7 – “mire” (wet and swampy ground) indicates that the boy is in a wooded area.


### “The Little Boy Found”

I 1 – “fen” is a swamp or marsh  
II 3-4 – God appears “like his father” – also note again the use of the color white, a symbol of purity. Symbolically, we (the child) are spiritually “lost” and need God to rescue us and give us hope.

## Songs of Experience

In “Songs of Experience,” the speaker in the introduction is quite different from our pastoral singer in the introduction to “Songs of Innocence.” This is a “bard,” an omniscient, divine poet-prophet who speaks to the “lapsed soul.” (I.6)

### “Introduction”

II 4 & 5 – allusion – may refer to God in the Garden of Eden – God walked there “in the cool of the day…” (Genesis 3:8)  
I 6 – “…lapsed soul…” – the fallen soul (spirit)  
II 6 & 7 – the bard mourns the fallen and tries to renew their spirits  
I 10 – the “fallen” are renewed by light (spiritual insight of **imagination**) falling on them  
II 11-15 – traditional poetic *imagery* of morning/dawn symbolizing a new beginning – fresh start.  
II 18 & 19 – **symbolism** – these represent the world of time and space that limits the spirit.  
I 20 – “…break of day…” – refers to a visionary age – a time of redemption


### “The Tiger” 

II 1-4 – the rhythm helps to convey a sense of relentless power  
II 3 & 4 – what could possibly have created so frightening and awe inspiring a creature?  
II 21-24 – **parallelism** – the last stanza is almost identical to the first – this refrain conveys awe and reverence.  
**mood** – there is a feeling of awe at the tiger’s power – the tiger probably symbolizes the fearful power of worldly experience – the tiger can’t be explained rationally! (the poet’s departure from the neoclassical idea of order and rationality)


### "A Poison Tree"

I 2-4 in this line, the poet suggests the dangers of repressed anger - concealed anger poisons the heart!  
II 5-8 - **metaphor** - in the extended metaphor, Blake likens his anger to the growth of Eden.  
I 10 - *allusion* - the plant is an apple tree, similar to the infamous one in the Garden of Eden.  


### "The Chiminey Sweeper"

I 1 - make note that the child here is referred to as a "little black thing" - suggests hopelessness and loss of humanity.  
I 2 - "...'weep, 'weep..." - a child's attempt to say "Sweep, Sweep" - a chiminy sweeper's street cry.  
II 5-8 - the child has been taken from this relative safety and comfort of his home and forced to work - he understands this - the effects of the *adult* world!  
II 9-end - the parents, meanwhile, are in church, rejoicing in the child's "success" as he suffers in the world of darkness and death.  


### "The Sick Rose"

In typical Blake fashion, the use of ***symbolism*** is very important here/. The "rose" seems to represent our soul, whose purity has been invaded by the "worm" of sin or corrpution.