---
layout: post
title:  "The Rape of the Lock"
date:   2019-02-05
excerpt: "The Rape of the Lock is a mock-heroic narrative poem written by Alexander Pope. One of the most commonly cited examples of high burlesque, it was first published anonymously in Lintot's Miscellaneous Poems and Translations (May 1712) in two cantos; a revised edition 'Written by Mr. Pope' followed in March 1714 as a five-canto version  accompanied by six engravings."
tag:
- English
- Notes
- Pope
- Historical
comments: true
---


## Read the Mock Epic
[Canto 1](https://www.bartleby.com/203/41.html)  
[Canto 2](https://www.bartleby.com/203/42.html)  
[Canto 3](https://www.bartleby.com/203/43.html)  
[Canto 4](https://www.bartleby.com/203/44.html)  
[Canto 5](https://www.bartleby.com/203/45.html)  

## Notes
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Many consider Alexander Pope the greatest poet of the eighteenth century and, along with Chaucer and Byron, one of the greatest verse satirists in English. Pope’s **<span class="underline">satire</span>** may seem to demand much knowledge of eighteenth-century life, but in truth it does not. As a satirist, Pope aims at universal follies. “The Rape of the Lock” is one of the finer examples of the **<span class="underline">mock epic</span>**, where trivial subjects are presented on a grand scale. Our other experience with this form was in the Medieval age, with Chaucer’s “The Nun’s Priest’s Tale.”

### Canto III

ll. 1-8 – Hampton Court, the royal palace about 15 miles up the Thames from London,

was associated with wits as well as statesmen.

ll. 11-12 – visiting was part of the daily routine of the fashionable young lady –

Belinda’s voyage up the Thames parallels Aeneas’ up the Tiber.

l. 16 – **<span class="underline">hyperbole</span>** – gossip can be destructive, but this is a somewhat extreme claim.

ll. 21-22 – **<span class="underline">satire</span>** – implies that hungry, tired judges and juries make hasty decisions in

order to eat dinner.

l. 24 – “and the long labors of the toilet cease.” – **<span class="underline">satire</span>** – Pope is alluding to the

many long hours women spent in front of the mirror – “toilet” in this era referred

to the dressing room.

l. 27 – “Ombre” was a Spanish card game, hence the Spanish names for some cards

ll. 34-36 – **<span class="underline">satire</span>** – Pope here pokes fun at the aristocratic female preoccupation with

social status and position.

ll. 43-44 – nice visual images – suggest brightness, lightness – also, “velvet plain”

refers to the card table.

l. 45 – “skillful nymph” refers to Belinda

ll. 55-64 – **<span class="underline">diction</span>** – Pope describes the hands of the cards in language usually

reserved for epic heroes.

ll. 65-69 – at this stage in the game, the Baron’s hand is strong enough to threaten,

but Belinda has the cards to win.

l. 80 – **<span class="underline">metaphor</span>** – the green felt table covering is described as a battlefield – Pope

also refers to it as “velvet plain” (l.44) and “verdant field” (l.52)

ll. 87-91 – at this point, for a brief moment, it appears that Belinda is in real danger of

losing, as her pale look indicates.

l. 99 – Belinda’s reaction to her victory is pretty undignified for a woman of this era

(especially when the victory is over a man\!)

ll. 101-104 – **<span class="underline">foreshadowing</span>** – a little commentary here on humanity that hints at

coming events and sets it in a universal context.

l. 113 – “airy band” refers to the sylphs, assigned to protect Belinda – they parallel the

angels assigned to protect Adam and Eve in *Paradise Lost*.

ll. 115-116 – the sylphs are guarding Belinda’s expensive dress against spills.

ll. 122-124 – **<span class="underline">allusion</span>** – refers to a story in Ovid’s *Metamorphoses*, Book VIII.

ll. 133-134 – as she is pouring coffee, Belinda is bending her head down, making her

lock of hair vulnerable.

ll. 135-136 – In Canto II all the sylphs are given particular duties in defense of Belinda-

Ariel is the chief of the sylphs.

ll. 139-146 – at this crucial moment, Ariel looks into Belinda’s mind and discovers that,

in reality, she *loves* the Baron\!

ll. 149-152 – in Milton’s *Paradise Lost*, Book VI, Satan is cut in two by the archangel

Michael, with the same result.

ll. 155-160 – hilarious section, where Belinda’s screams over the cutting of her hair are

described.

ll. 161-178 – the Baron’s “celebration” at the capturing of his prize is completely over

the top\! Excellent example of **<span class="underline">hyperbole</span>** and **<span class="underline">satire</span>** – lines 173-174 are

an **<span class="underline">allusion</span>** to *The Iliad* – supposedly the walls of Troy were built by the

“labor of the gods” Apollo and Poseidon.

### Canto V

(the climactic “battle” which is described here is a classic device of **epic poetry**)

l. 8 – **<span class="underline">simile</span>** – the lords and ladies fight “like gods” in an essentially trivial battle

ll. 17-18 – **<span class="underline">allusion</span>** – another a parallel with Homer – during the battle of Ulysses

and the suitors, Minerva sits on a roof beam to see the action.

l. 28 – **<span class="underline">allusion</span>** – Sir Fopling’s swan song echoes words of an aria in the opera

*Camilla* by Bonocini.

ll. 35-36 – **<span class="underline">allusion</span>** – Jove (Jupiter), as father of the gods, made decisions in this way

when he presided over the games in Roman mythology.

ll. 51-52 – a “bodkin” is a large needle with decorated head used in the hair –

Belinda’s bodkin’s history may be <span class="underline">satirically</span> compared to that of

Agamemnon’s scepter in Homer.

ll. 61-62 – **<span class="underline">satire</span>** – Belinda’s triviality is accented by the comparison here with one

of the great tragic heroes in English drama.

ll. 79-82 – a consolation for Belinda – she has been immortalized by the lock of hair

she lost, not by the many tresses she kept.

ll. 87-88 – **<span class="underline">allusion</span>** – Belinda will be like Berenice, whose locks were stolen from

Venus’s temple and placed in the heavens in a constellation called

*Coma Berenices.*
